docs: pm: Update device pm documentation (#46805)
zephyrproject-rtos/zephyr: doc/services/pm/device.rst

Device Power Management
#######################

Introduction
************

Device power management (PM) on Zephyr is a feature that possibilites
devices to save energy when they are not being used. This feature can
be enabled by setting :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_PM_DEVICE`. When this

> option is selected, devices implementing power management will be able

Author: +1 for device drivers, but adding callbacks is not right. Currently there are more things that should be done.

If a decision to enter a CPU lower power state is made, the power management
subsystem will suspend devices before changing state. The subsystem takes care
of suspend devices following their initialization order, ensuring that possible
dependencies between them are satisfied. As soon as the CPU wakes up from a
sleep states, devices are resumed following the reverse order that they were
suspended.

.. note::

   When using :ref:`pm-system`, device transitions can be run from the idle thread.
   As functions in this context cannot block, transitions that intend to use blocking
   API's **must** check whether they can do so with :c:func:`k_can_yield`.

This method can be used in implementations where the applications and components
using devices are not expected to be power aware and do not implement runtime
device power management.

.. note::

    The CPU will enter a low power state only if the devices are not in the
    middle of a hardware transaction that cannot be interrupted.

Device Power Management States
******************************

The power management subsystem defines device states in
:c:enum:`pm_device_state`. This type is used to track power states of

> a particular device. It is important to emphasizes that, although the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
a particular device. It is important to emphasize that, although the
```

> state is tracked by the subsystem, it is a device responsibility to
> handle an action (:c:enum:`pm_device_action`) to change its state.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```suggestion
state is tracked by the subsystem, it is the responsibility of each
device driver to handle device actions (:c:enum:`pm_device_action`) 
which change device state.
```
```

> Each :c:enum:`pm_device_action` have a direct an ambiguous relationship with

Reviewer: ??

Did you mean "has a direct and unambiguous" instead?

Author: yep :p

a :c:enum:`pm_device_state`.

.. graphviz::
   :caption: Device actions x states

    digraph {
        node [shape=box];
	rankdir=LR;

        SUSPENDED [label=PM_DEVICE_STATE_SUSPENDED];
        ACTIVE [label=PM_DEVICE_STATE_ACTIVE];
        SUSPENDING [label=PM_DEVICE_STATE_SUSPENDING];
        OFF [label=PM_DEVICE_STATE_OFF];

        SUSPEND [label=PM_DEVICE_ACTION_SUSPEND];
        RESUME [label=PM_DEVICE_ACTION_RESUME];
        TURN_OFF [label=PM_DEVICE_ACTION_TURN_OFF];
        TURN_ON [label=PM_DEVICE_ACTION_TURN_ON];
        FORCE_SUSPEND [label=PM_DEVICE_ACTION_FORCE_SUSPEND];

	SUSPEND -> SUSPENDING -> SUSPENDED;
	FORCE_SUSPEND -> SUSPENDING;
	RESUME -> ACTIVE;
	TURN_OFF -> OFF;
	TURN_ON -> ACTIVE;
    }

> Devices do not directly change states, this is entirely done by the power management
> subsystem.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As mentioned above, device drivers do not directly change between these states.
This is entirely done by the power management subsystem. Instead, drivers are
responsible for implementing any hardware-specific tasks needed to handle state
changes.
```

Author: much better :)

Device Model with Power Management Support
******************************************

Drivers initialize devices using macros. See :ref:`device_model_api` for

> details on how these macros are used. When a driver supports power management
> there are some additional steps that a driver must do. The very first step is to
> define the power management resources for the particular driver, this is done
> using :c:macro:`PM_DEVICE_DEFINE` or
> :c:macro:`PM_DEVICE_DT_DEFINE`. These macros create a resource with
> all information necessary by the power management subsystem.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
details on how these macros are used. A driver which implements power
management support must provide these macros with arguments that
describe its power management implementation.

Use :c:macro:`PM_DEVICE_DEFINE` or :c:macro:`PM_DEVICE_DT_DEFINE`
to define the power management resources required by a driver.
These macros allocate the driver-specific state which
is required by the power management subsystem.
```

> After the device power management resource be created, it is still necessary to
> bind it to the device driver. This last step is done using :c:macro:`PM_DEVICE_GET`
> or :c:macro:`PM_DEVICE_DT_GET` for field `pm_device` in macros used to define / initialize a device.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Drivers can use :c:macro:`PM_DEVICE_GET` or :c:macro:`PM_DEVICE_DT_GET`
to get a pointer to this state. These pointers should be passed to
``DEVICE_DEFINE`` or ``DEVICE_DT_DEFINE`` to initialize the
``pm_device`` field in each ``struct device``.
```

> The example below shows, including an action callback implementation, how to
> support power management on a device.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here is some example code showing how to implement power management
support in a device driver.
```

.. code-block:: c

    static int dummy_driver_pm_action(const struct device *dev,
                               enum pm_device_action *action)
    {
        switch (action) {
        case PM_DEVICE_ACTION_SUSPEND:
            /* suspend the device */
            ...
            break;
        case PM_DEVICE_ACTION_RESUME:
            /* resume the device */
            ...
            break;
        case PM_DEVICE_ACTION_TURN_ON:
            /* powered on the device */
            ...
        case PM_DEVICE_ACTION_TURN_OFF:
            /* powered off the device */
            ...
        default:
            return -ENOTSUP;
        }

        return 0;
    }

    PM_DEVICE_DEFINE(dummy_driver, dummy_driver_pm_action);

    DEVICE_DEFINE(dummy_driver, DUMMY_DRIVER_NAME, &dummy_init,
        PM_DEVICE_GET(dummy_driver), NULL, NULL, APPLICATION,

>         CONFIG_KERNEL_INIT_PRIORITY_DEFAULT, &funcs);

Reviewer: I would really like to see this reworked to use the devicetree variants. 99.9% of drivers are going to be using DT to initialize their devices.

Author: Yep, that makes sense. Changed.

.. _pm-device-busy:

Busy Status Indication
**********************

When the system is idle and the SoC is going to sleep, the power
management subsystem can suspend devices, as described in

> :ref:`pm-device-system-pm`, which can cause them to lose their

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:ref:`pm-device-system-pm`. This can cause device hardware to lose some
```

> state. If devices are in the middle of some hardware transaction, like
> writing to flash memory, and the power is turned off it may lead the
> device to an inconsistent state. This API guards such transactions by

Reviewer: ```suggestion
state. Suspending a device which is in the middle of a hardware
transaction, such as writing to a flash memory, may lead to undefined
behavior or inconsistent states. This API guards such transactions by
```

.. _pm-device-system-pm:

System Power Management
***********************

When using this type, device power management is mostly done inside
:c:func:`pm_system_suspend()` along with entering a CPU or SOC power state.

If a decision to enter a CPU lower power state is made, the power management
subsystem will suspend devices before changing state. The subsystem takes care
of suspending devices following their initialization order, ensuring that
possible dependencies between them are satisfied. As soon as the CPU wakes up
from a sleep state, devices are resumed in the opposite order that they were
suspended.

.. note::

   When using :ref:`pm-system`, device transitions can be run from the idle thread.
   As functions in this context cannot block, transitions that intend to use blocking
   APIs **must** check whether they can do so with :c:func:`k_can_yield`.

This type of device power management can be useful when the application is not
power aware and does not implement runtime device power management.

.. note::

    When using this type of device power managment, the CPU will only enter
    a low power state only if no device is in the middle of a hardware

>     transaction that cannot be interrupted.

Reviewer 2: I think it's worth mentioning that runtime is preferred over this approach, and that there is an option to disable it now when using runtime PM: `CONFIG_PM_DEVICE_RUNTIME_EXCLUSIVE` (enabled by default if `CONFIG_PM_DEVICE_RUNTIME=y`.

	SUSPEND -> SUSPENDING -> SUSPENDED;
	FORCE_SUSPEND -> SUSPENDING;
	RESUME -> ACTIVE;
	TURN_OFF -> OFF;
	TURN_ON -> ACTIVE;
    }

As mentioned above, device drivers do not directly change between these states.
This is entirely done by the power management subsystem. Instead, drivers are
responsible for implementing any hardware-specific tasks needed to handle state
changes.

Device Model with Power Management Support
******************************************

Drivers initialize devices using macros. See :ref:`device_model_api` for
details on how these macros are used. A driver which implements device power
management support must provide these macros with arguments that describe its
power management implementation.

Use :c:macro:`PM_DEVICE_DEFINE` or :c:macro:`PM_DEVICE_DT_DEFINE` to define the
power management resources required by a driver. These macros allocate the
driver-specific state which is required by the power management subsystem.

Drivers can use :c:macro:`PM_DEVICE_GET` or :c:macro:`PM_DEVICE_DT_GET`
to get a pointer to this state. These pointers should be passed to
``DEVICE_DEFINE`` or ``DEVICE_DT_DEFINE`` to initialize the

> ``pm_device`` field in each ``struct device``.

Reviewer 2: which fields are initialized are implementation details, I think they are not needed.

Author: I'll make it generic, though, I still think it is valid to mention the relation with device.

Here is some example code showing how to implement device power management
support in a device driver.

.. code-block:: c

>     #define DUMMY_DEVICE DT_NODELABEL(dummy_device)

Reviewer 2: let's use instance based example, this is not the most common way to define a device driver nowadays.

    static int dummy_driver_pm_action(const struct device *dev,

>                                enum pm_device_action *action)

Reviewer 2: nit: align here

    {
        switch (action) {
        case PM_DEVICE_ACTION_SUSPEND:
            /* suspend the device */
            ...
            break;
        case PM_DEVICE_ACTION_RESUME:
            /* resume the device */
            ...
            break;
        case PM_DEVICE_ACTION_TURN_ON:
            /* powered on the device */
            ...
            break;
        case PM_DEVICE_ACTION_TURN_OFF:
            /* power off the device */
            ...

>             break;

Reviewer 2: this needs better explanation: it's related to PM domains

Author: I don't know, I'm trying to avoid duplication, this is already documented in the power domains section. Maybe add one more comment saying that they are related with power domains ?

Author: I've added a new comment mentioning it. +

The power management subsystem defines device states in
:c:enum:`pm_device_state`. This type is used to track power states of
a particular device. It is important to emphasize that, although the
state is tracked by the subsystem, it is the responsibility of each device driver
to handle device actions(:c:enum:`pm_device_action`) which change device state.

Each :c:enum:`pm_device_action` have a direct an unambiguous relationship with
a :c:enum:`pm_device_state`.

.. graphviz::
   :caption: Device actions x states

    digraph {
        node [shape=box];
        rankdir=LR;

        SUSPENDED [label=PM_DEVICE_STATE_SUSPENDED];
        ACTIVE [label=PM_DEVICE_STATE_ACTIVE];
        SUSPENDING [label=PM_DEVICE_STATE_SUSPENDING];
        OFF [label=PM_DEVICE_STATE_OFF];

        SUSPEND [label=PM_DEVICE_ACTION_SUSPEND];
        RESUME [label=PM_DEVICE_ACTION_RESUME];
        TURN_OFF [label=PM_DEVICE_ACTION_TURN_OFF];
        TURN_ON [label=PM_DEVICE_ACTION_TURN_ON];
        FORCE_SUSPEND [label=PM_DEVICE_ACTION_FORCE_SUSPEND];

        SUSPEND -> SUSPENDING -> SUSPENDED;
        FORCE_SUSPEND -> SUSPENDING;
        RESUME -> ACTIVE;
        TURN_OFF -> OFF;

>         TURN_ON -> ACTIVE;

Reviewer 3: So I notice that `TURN_ON` and `TURN_OFF` have never really been properly defined in their transitions. When I implemented them, the intention was that `TURN_OFF` should only ever be called from `STATE_SUSPENDED`, and that `TURN_ON` would return the device to `STATE_SUSPENDED`.

The intention there is to simplify device driver logic, as there is only a single path from `ACTIVE` to `OFF` (via `SUSPENDED`). Otherwise the device needs to query its own state to work out what to do (which we moved away from in transitioning to the action based API).

This gives a graph like
```
digraph {
    node [shape=box];
    rankdir=LR;

    SUSPENDED [label=PM_DEVICE_STATE_SUSPENDED];
    ACTIVE [label=PM_DEVICE_STATE_ACTIVE];
    OFF [label=PM_DEVICE_STATE_OFF];

    OFF -> SUSPENDED ["label"="PM_DEVICE_ACTION_TURN_ON"]
    SUSPENDED -> OFF ["label"="PM_DEVICE_ACTION_TURN_OFF"]

    SUSPENDED -> ACTIVE ["label"="PM_DEVICE_ACTION_RESUME"]
    ACTIVE -> SUSPENDED ["label"="PM_DEVICE_ACTION_SUSPEND"]
}
```

Author: Good catch ! I'll update the "TURN_ON" transition. Regarding the suspending, I don't want to
mention device runtime pm here, I will just show these two possible transitions:
1) active -> suspended
2) active -> suspending -> suspended

Author: Regarding the `ACTIVE` to `OFF` path, there is nothing blocking the
path from `ACTIVE` to `OFF` without going through suspended.

POWER_DOMAIN (ACTIVE) { DEVICE_A (ACTIVE), DEVICE_B (ACTIVE)};

pm_device_runtime_put(POWER_DOMAIN);

POWER_DOMAIN (supended) --> DEVICE_A (TURN_OFF)
                        |
						--> DEVICE_B (TURN_OFF)

Reviewer 3: I agree that there is nothing enforcing the transition through `SUSPENDED`, but your example is incorrect API usage IMO.
If `DEV_A` and `DEV_B` are active, then they have previously called `pm_device_runtime_get` on the power domain.
Therefore the manual `put` won't depower the domain. Additionally, you have a manual `put` without a corresponding `get`, there is no surprise that things can end up in a weird state.

Author: I agree with you, but this is possible. We are documenting the possible transitions here, and right that is possible. I think in guidelines we recommend always calling the child first. But the problem right, is that we have some devices doing runtime PM and others not. So, it is very possible this scenario and it should be documented IMHO.

I'll be super glad to remove it when device runtime will be the only way to do device pm.

subsystem will suspend devices before changing state. The subsystem takes care
of suspending devices following their initialization order, ensuring that
possible dependencies between them are satisfied. As soon as the CPU wakes up
from a sleep state, devices are resumed in the opposite order that they were
suspended.

.. note::

   When using :ref:`pm-system`, device transitions can be run from the idle thread.
   As functions in this context cannot block, transitions that intend to use blocking
   APIs **must** check whether they can do so with :c:func:`k_can_yield`.

This type of device power management can be useful when the application is not
power aware and does not implement runtime device power management. Though,
:ref:`Device Runtime Power Management <pm-device-runtime-pm>` is the **preferred**
option for device power management.

.. note::

    When using this type of device power management, the CPU will only enter
    a low power state only if no device is in the middle of a hardware
    transaction that cannot be interrupted.

.. note::

    This type of device power management is disabled when

>     :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_PM_DEVICE_RUNTIME_EXCLUSIVE` is set to `y` (that is

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_PM_DEVICE_RUNTIME_EXCLUSIVE` is set to ``y`` (that is
```

            SUSPENDED -> OFF ["label"="PM_DEVICE_ACTION_TURN_OFF"];
            ACTIVE -> OFF ["label"="PM_DEVICE_ACTION_TURN_OFF"];
        }
    }

As mentioned above, device drivers do not directly change between these states.
This is entirely done by the power management subsystem. Instead, drivers are
responsible for implementing any hardware-specific tasks needed to handle state
changes.

Device Model with Power Management Support
******************************************

Drivers initialize devices using macros. See :ref:`device_model_api` for
details on how these macros are used. A driver which implements device power
management support must provide these macros with arguments that describe its
power management implementation.

Use :c:macro:`PM_DEVICE_DEFINE` or :c:macro:`PM_DEVICE_DT_DEFINE` to define the
power management resources required by a driver. These macros allocate the
driver-specific state which is required by the power management subsystem.

Drivers can use :c:macro:`PM_DEVICE_GET` or
:c:macro:`PM_DEVICE_DT_GET` to get a pointer to this state. These
pointers should be passed to ``DEVICE_DEFINE`` or ``DEVICE_DT_DEFINE``

> to initialize the power management field in each ``struct device``.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
to initialize the power management field in each :c:struct:`device`.
```

Here is some example code showing how to implement device power management
support in a device driver.

.. code-block:: c

    #define DT_DRV_COMPAT dummy_device

    static int dummy_driver_pm_action(const struct device *dev,
                                      enum pm_device_action *action)
    {
        switch (action) {
        case PM_DEVICE_ACTION_SUSPEND:
            /* suspend the device */
            ...
            break;
        case PM_DEVICE_ACTION_RESUME:
            /* resume the device */
            ...
            break;
        case PM_DEVICE_ACTION_TURN_ON:
            /*
	     * powered on the device, used when the power
	     * domain this device belongs is resumed.
	     */
            ...
            break;
        case PM_DEVICE_ACTION_TURN_OFF:
            /*
	     * power off the device, used when the power
	     * domain this device belongs is suspended.

> 	     */

Reviewer 2: nit: fix alignment here (mixes tabs/spaces)

            ...
            break;
        default:
            return -ENOTSUP;
        }

        return 0;
    }

    PM_DEVICE_DT_INST_DEFINE(0, dummy_driver_pm_action);

    DEVICE_DT_INST_DEFINE(0, &dummy_init,
        PM_DEVICE_DT_INST_GET(0), NULL, NULL, POST_KERNEL,
        CONFIG_KERNEL_INIT_PRIORITY_DEFAULT, NULL);

.. _pm-device-busy:

Busy Status Indication
**********************

When the system is idle and the SoC is going to sleep, the power management
subsystem can suspend devices, as described in :ref:`pm-device-system-pm`. This

> can cause device hardware to lose some states. Suspending a device which is in

Reviewer: Looks like a typo sneaked in here in the latest push. It should be "lose some state".

Author: weird, "ambiguous" was fixed, your comment even has an "outdated" label. Don't know what revision you have looked.
The other indeed is there, fixing it.

Power domain on Zephyr is represented as a regular device. The power management
subsystem ensures that a domain is resumed before and suspended after devices

> using it. For more information check :ref:`Power Domain <pm-power-domain>`
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
using it. For more details, see :ref:`pm-power-domain`.
```
